it's hard to believe it's been 85 days
since lockdown began sometimes feels
longer it does it's been tough going for
all of us but with non-essential shops
reopening this week in some places for
many of us it does sort of feel like a
return to normality yeah yeah but not
all of us are able to enjoy the same
freedoms right now as more than 2
million people across the country are
still being advised to stay at home as
much as possible because the risk to
their health is too great so we've been
catching up with two households still
currently shielding with one family
receiving a surprise call from none
other than the Duke of Cambridge Prince
William
my name is oval into them when the city
as always I live in Leeds and I have a
go somewhere see cognition for spinal
muscular atrophy should I have been
shielding work with my deed sister Liza
branch but I was very lucky in the
beginning okay like any particular lodge
for sex lot less tightly I was public in
and well the birthday without I had a
meeting with her just three words I was
really sad so I could read like Paris I
worked out everything for those party
I'm just slowly shall be gained the
confidence to venture out further
surprising it was a little bit scary
because I was going further than just
rather pollen but he was really excited
to see me so I was asked a very well we
just saw a lift in the well but those
three hours
five-year-old Caden how cystic fibrosis
which means his lungs are vulnerable to
infection he's been shielding since the
17th of March what you missing both
though about not being able to go out
just before shielding rules were relaxed
slightly in England on the first of June
Caden got a surprise video call from the
Duke of Cambridge Prince William I can
see that came it's a brilliant rainbow
t-shirt how you doing okay you can
imagine you know yourself you've got
five year old to try and keep them in
and contained is quite difficult and
what are some specific challenges that
you find really hard learn is it just
trying to entertain him and keep him
busy with outside everyday social
interaction and to have that taken away
from him that's been the worst when he
was actually trying to fill the side
door open
really begging me if he could walk
through a wall burn and I was like
really can't let you out Caden it's
horrible it's a shower it's a shower
very cool is it even more hard and
frustrating for you guys bear in mind
they lock down starting to ease a little
bit and they were so he's now like well
why can everyone else go out and I can a
lot of people start to go back to to
work a lot more and and we need to keep
the focus on on you guys who are going
to be shielded and find that very very
difficult
Cajuns emotional a little bit afraid I'm
now worried boys showing you chase from
paw patrol now I think I know chase yeah
see you a new times George used to watch
patrol a lot I would just wanted a ring
to say Catherine I think you guys very
soon since that call the advice changed
and Cajuns been able to venture out a
little bit more Cajun how would you feel
about being our what you wish would
happen if iris
you're happy to be outputted too aren't
you yes
and you've seen a swan oh thank you so
much to shelby Leanne and Caden for
sharing their stories with us and of
course to Prince William it must have
been so tough for her as a mum to try
and convince him that he had to stay now
you know it's really hard with Prince
William lovely on those calls dr. Sarah
Jarvis is with us now the big news today
of course is about the dexamethasone
drug in practicing we'll talk about that
later but first there are more than 2.2
million people still shielding right now
just remind us exactly who the at-risk
people are so the advice came out in the
middle of March some people didn't get
their letters for quite a long time
after that but the idea was that they
should shield for at least 12 weeks it's
now going up to the end of June and
that'll be people like Caden who've got
cystic fibrosis people have had a organ
transplant people are on chemotherapy
for cancer people who got blood or bone
marrow cancers and a group of others but
the good news is that the Royal College
of pediatrics and child health has just
come out with a new position statement
saying actually they think a lot of
children currently on the shielded list
maybe don't need to be on it because the
risk to children is so small
unfortunately that doesn't include kids
with cystic fibrosis them now the Prime
Minister is about to give an update for
the shielded group any ideas what those
announcements may look like I mean some
people may not want to do any more than
they do in any way but what would be an
option for well I'm not privy to what
goes on and what goes on in his mind but
I do know that the number of people
affected is significantly lower than it
was when we went in and we are
absolutely coming down the peak on the
other side now we are not there yet so
we can't all stop and think life's come
back to normal but we're now looking at
about one in 1,800 people we think at
any one time affected that means that
given that that does seem still to be
going down the risks for people who are
shielded
much slower than they were and I think
that announcement in England on the 1st
of June that people can come out for
with one other person either remember
their household or if necessary someone
who isn't but staying two meters apart
staying outdoors I think that's an
indication that we're going to see him
saying actually it's getting safe enough
that you can start to do more yeah and
if you are shielding what support is
there for you lots of support available
so they've been more than 3-million food
boxes delivered about three hundred
thousand a week
about a hundred thousand calls a day
made to find out about people support
needs those amazing more than half a
million volunteers NHS volunteers
ringing up to check on people if they're
lonely mental health support four
hundred thousand pharmacy deliveries
loads of stuff and it is still going on
you can still register if you're on the
shielded list on wkyt.com
[Music]
[Applause]